thank you all very very much thank you
drag race
thank you I know I'm doing all right
when the band stands thank you gentlemen
you know I say to the parents and
grandparents and siblings you think
Syracuse would have learned by now this
is the fifth time a Biden has addressed
the commencement I guess it's trouble
getting anybody else to come it's a
great honor to be invited back
Dean banks thank you
not for the introduction but for your
friendship and to the faculty and staff
you for your serve this great
institution I mean that sincerely
to the chagrin of some of my professors
I actually taught for 21 years at
Delaware law school an advanced course
in constitutional law of separation of
powers and so I would not be accused of
having any conflict I taught it on
Saturday mornings was a three-hour
course three credit course and it's
satisfied for the reading plan and even
though I literally wrote the manuscript
because I had some considerable
experience of separation of powers and
with the help of Dean banks as chair of
the dishes of the both judiciary and
Foreign Relations Committee I there
wasn't a single class I thought and I
did it for 19 years that I didn't spend
three hours preparing either the night
before or up early in that morning so my
wife's a professor she was a doctor at
she's her doctor she teaches in
Community College and I talk to job I
mean that maybe I wasn't I mean this was
20 years ago and I might want to teach
but I realized you really have to work
and my day job was better
thank you for your dedication I really
mean it
I genuinely generally mean it and the
class of 2016 by foot before I talk
about you guys I want to talk a little
bit about those folks behind you be nice
to them you may need them to pay off
your college your law school loans you
may need their help the parents and
grandparents and spouses all who helped
it is an enormous sacrifice an enormous
cost to get a graduate degree at any
institution of the law degree in the
institution and I I I know you'll all
you all believe today that whatever part
you played in that effort was worth it
because as my dad would say who never
went to college I'd ask him all the time
why he thought it was so important I get
a college degree in the law degree he
said because they can never take it from
you I never fully understood that until
I got older and realized what my father
said which was what you've learned what
you know both equips you but also
prevent you from rationalizing about
things you might otherwise want to do
that are easier and so I say to class of
2016
you made it 11 winner and two all in two
weeks of spring I remember I remember I
told him Dean this I I don't want to
guess I should have start telling
stories because it'll take too long but
my son Beau was my soul my son Beau I
talked to him every single day and he
called me his senior year
it was April the 13th I used to always
brag about tell my kids a story about
the blizzard of 66 60 inches of snow
here in Syracuse
for real 100 inches of Watertown I tell
my kids and then my grandkids that story
so October the 13th early in the morning
I got a call from my son he never called
the morning I said what's the matter
honey it's not nothing dad I just walked
up from the Genesee he said he said I
just want you to know it's April 13th it
was Friday April 13th I thought he's
gonna make some joke about it being
unlucky I so you know everything unlucky
for everyone else is lucky for biden's
and he said yeah dad but he said it's
April 13th they just announced I'm in
the law school lounge 13 inches of snow
has fallen today and then he said and
they announced that the more snow is
falling this year than any time a
recorded history I think there's one
hundred ninety eight inches don't hold
me to the number then he said dad I now
own the snow stories so not only did you
make you through the winter you climbed
out of the dungeon into the need Hall
you actually have sunlight no more we
love terror
no more nightmares the professor
laughing would Lempa would be calling on
you in class I had a similar experience
with a professor named Alexander who was
my torts professor because I was a
scholarship student I got to take role
was sad all the way in the back no was
ever absent and and everybody dreaded
being called on by professor Alexander
and I had not prepared all that well a
matter of fact I'm embarrassed to say I
hadn't even bought purchased the book
yet and the back of class and I had a
great friend named Clayton Hale who had
lived here as a lawyer here brilliant
guy who I'd always be able to borrow
clays notes on the way home and and so
he called on me I didn't know I hadn't
read the case I stood up and I gave a 10
minutes exposition on the case and when
I finished the entire class stood and
applauded and the president of the guy
graduated number one in our class bond
become the managing partner of Sullivan
Cromwell
and said reminded everyone when he
supported me running for president he
said and the professor looked at Biden
say you know mr. Biden you'll probably
become a very good advocate it's obvious
you don't know a damn thing you're
saying but you're spellbound the class
for ten minutes that sort of summarizes
my career at Syracuse but it's a genuine
salute or unfortunately he went on to be
Dean of a law school in the West Coast
it's a genuine honor to be back at a
place I love a law school where I made
incredible friends who have lasted my
whole life including my best friend Jack
Owens who ended up becoming my law
partner and then my brother-in-law
Baba's good Don Parsons clay hey lady
Moses Joe watch on Covino Don McNaughton
who named the facility after his mom and
so many others this law school educated
and stood by me throughout my career
professor Tom Maroney I don't know
they're I told he may be here one of the
finest guys I've ever known in time
stand up man
stand up
press is not all a man of great
integrity he convinced me that I could
be whatever I want it to be the only
reason anyone ever questioned his
judgment is he gave me an A in this
course and guys like Sam Donnelly who
taught here for 42 years or 44 years so
we lost last year a Dean Karras Dean
Miller to many others to mention they
did everything for me they helped me
Dean Miller's I they helped me get my
first job in the law I'll never forget
the concluding line and Dean Miller's
recommendation the letter he wrote to me
I'm serious it said you will be indeed
fortunate if you get mr. Biden to work
for you he never lied my classmates and
my professors literally helped me get
elected to the United States Senate at
age 29 I was not able to be sworn in
until I was so legally thirteen days
later this school this law school my
faculty my friends embraced me with open
arms when six weeks later after being
elected my wife and daughter were killed
when a tractor-trailer broadsided them
and my two sons without expected to live
there with me when I announced I wasn't
going to be sworn in to my professors
came to see me encouraging me telling me
they're only 17 and 120 people American
history would ever been elected to the
United States Senate and I had an
obligation to my wife and my family
because they work so hard
the fact is that when I launched my
first presidential bid in 1988 a number
of my colleagues and a couple professors
actually drove to Wilmington and got on
the train and rode with me to my they
were there with my announcement as I
announced in Wilmington and wrote on me
to Washington as I announced on the
national stage as well they embraced me
and they embraced me when I lost as if I
had won as if I had won they supported
me in 71 in campaigns to the United
States Senate to as vice president the
type of loyalty that this school has
extended to me is truly where rare and
generally welcoming it was the same for
my my son beau who loves Syracuse as
well you embraced him when he enrolled
here not as a senator's son but as Beau
Biden on his own terms
you prepared him to be a great lawyer
which he was and a young attorney
general two terms he made great friends
here as I did George the to Chris's Andy
Joe Lisa Marie Natalie actually had an
advantage over me half his class like
this class of women we only had one
woman in our graduating class and the
profession is so much better off now the
bench is so much more competent now and
the school is so much better now
some of you may think I'm gauging
hyperbole when I talk about the loyalty
but both friends were there well as the
sitting attorney general he sought an
exception to be able to go with his
National Guard unit to Iraq they
literally there and saw him off when he
volunteered to deploy as the army
Brigade trial counsel and after a year
in Iraq when he came home as a proud
veteran having been awarded the Bronze
Star the Legion of Merit the Delaware
conspicuous service cross his law school
friends were literally there when he
disembarked they stayed in contact with
him when three years ago he was
diagnosed with a death sentence of Stage
four glioblastoma in the brain they
visit him whatever hospital he was in
whether it was in Texas at one of the
great cancer hospitals or at Jefferson
in Philadelphia or at Walter Reed at the
end still there
looking out from my bows children
Natalie and Hunter his wife Hallie and
Dean miss school continue to look out
for my boys memory honoring him today
honoring him and a the scholarship thing
that the affection for Syracuse law
school runs deep in the Biden family two
generations approaching three Dean banks
on behalf of my son Hunter who made a
mistake he went to Yale Law School my
daughter Ashley my wife Jill Bo's wife
Hallie his children Natalie and Hunter
we are indebted to Syracuse not only for
the support but the affection it's shown
and continue to show to my beau it would
mean a lot to Beau knowing that a
deserving student will be able to attend
this great law school on a scholarship
that has his name attached to it those
of you who knew him in the audience know
I mean that he would have been proud he
was a good man he was the finest person
I've ever known in my life the class of
2016 you're a remarkable class the best
of your generation
in a remarkable generation again that's
not hyperbole your generation is the
most tolerant generation ever and with
the intellectual horsepower and the
tools to be able to make things happen
to get things done and now as you sit
there many of you have or are in the
process of deciding what will you do
with all this capability like all of you
when I graduated I felt a similar
pressure what will I do but the script
was written find the best job with the
most prestigious law firm you can be in
a position to advance to make good money
become a partner that's what I did I
landed a job because of the help of my
professors with one of the most
prestigious law firms in my state one of
the oldest in my state but the problem
was as I strode across the stage in 1968
the world had changed dr. King had been
assassinated there were riots throughout
America
a significant part in my hometown of
Wilmington Delaware was burned to the
ground we became the only city since
reconstruction to be occupied by the
military for nine months the National
Guard in every corner with drawn
bayonets
state troopers patrolling the
neighborhood not City cops and I was
home with a prestigious job because what
that was I supposed to do wasn't that
was I expected to do but six months
later
I realized that wasn't what I was
supposed to do and to the surprise of
the senior partners in my law firm I
walked out of a federal courtroom
catty-corner across what they call
Rodney square the center of town into
the base of the building on the far
corner and I walked into the public
defender's office and I asked for a job
remember the guy holding directing the
office and his name was Franny Kearns he
said aren't you with and I suggest he
said you're making a big mistake but
like many of your parents I was lucky
just in time I learned early on what I
wanted to do what made me the happiest
family faith being engaged in the public
affairs that gripped my generation when
I graduated the civil rights movement
environmental movement the women's
movement ending a bitterly divisive war
in Vietnam now it's your turn it's your
time time to attempt to find that sweet
spot where success and Happiness
intersect it's not easy
some of it you'll go into and onto
colorful law firms and Wall Street
government service prosecutors office
public defenders somebody will take the
knowledge and be successful
entrepreneurs representing and represent
nonprofits some of you serve in the
military some of you go back to your
home countries and risk risk your lives
for the rule of law
but all of you will have one thing in
common you'll all have to figure out how
to balance success happiness and
ambition I've met an awful lot of
successful people I've literally met
every major world leader in the last 42
years personally meant so many others
people who by any standard or consider
success but I've observed as I've gotten
to know many of them a significant
number of them are not happy I've worked
with eight presidents only 13 senators
have served longer than me and an
entirety of American history industry
leaders
thus icons of Silicon Valley
high-powered lawyers doctors nurses
teachers social workers and they made
several basic observations that I hope
will help you those who I observe to
achieve both success and happiness those
who balance life and career those who
found purpose and fulfillment they all
understood that there's no silver bullet
no single formula no reductive list
there all seem to understand that
success and Happiness do not result from
a single thing they result from an
accumulation of thousands of little
things with the common feature
that they built their character first
successful happy people I've come to
know understand that a good life at its
core is about being personal being
engaged it's being there for a friend or
colleague when they sustained an injury
in an accident
remembering to congratulate them on a
marriage or birth being available to
them as they're going through personal
loss or failure it's about loving
somebody more than you love yourself it
seems to all get down to personal that's
the stuff that fosters relationships and
the only stuff that breeds trust and
everything you do in life the way you
earn trust and I mean earn trust so try
to look beyond the character caricature
of a person resist the temptation to
ascribe motive because the truth is you
never know a person's motives and if you
ascribe motives it makes it incredibly
difficult and ever established to
establish a relationship it gets in the
way resist the temptation to let network
be a verb that saps the personal away
that blinds you to the person right in
front of you their hopes their fears
their burdens build real relationships
even with people with whom you
vehemently disagree I promise you will
not only be happier for it you will be
more successful second thing I've
observed they all believe although no
one is better than them everyone is
their equal and entitled to be treated
with dignity and respect regardless of
their academic or social backgrounds
think of the people you know who respond
to pedigree who respond to social
standing I've noticed that the ones who
had the most success and we're most
respected were the ones who never
confused academic credentials and social
sophistication with gravitas or judgment
you know a lot of people who are
incredibly bright who lacked judgment
they do not necessarily go together
and don't forget about what does not
come with your LLM or your JD and that
is the heart to know what is meaningful
and what is ephemeral and the head to
know the difference between knowledge
and judgment
the third thing in my experience they
all seem to have in common is that they
have resisted the temptation to
rationalize my chief of staff the later
United States Senator Ted Kaufman will
graduate the Wharton School brilliant
guy every new employee we'd hire the
last thing he'd say to them
never underestimate the ability of the
human mind to rationalize to end up with
it ends just to find the means ladies
and gentlemen I've seen as your parents
have you have so many people rationalize
in the name of ambition her birthday
really doesn't matter that much to her
this business trip is really important
it would be better for both of us I know
this is a last game but in order to make
it I'd have to take a red-eye back and
he'll understand we can always take that
vacation to another time the one I
promise that we plan for six months
because I have an important project to
finish you know it you doing
some of you've seen your parents do it
the resisted temptation will rationalize
what others view as the right choice for
you instead of what you know is right
what feels right what feels right in
your gut
based on what's important to you let
that be your North Star as I've said at
other graduations this year I know your
generation faces an incredible amount of
pressure to succeed
now they've accomplished so much your
whole generation faces the same pressure
just remarkable generation you race to
do another thing to do what others think
is the right thing in high school the
right courses to take you race through
the bloodsport of college admissions and
law school admissions you race to
Syracuse law ready for the next big
thing and I know you'll be reluctant to
admit it but along the way you compare
yourself to the success of your peers on
Facebook Instagram like in Twitter today
some of you may have found that you've
slipped into that safe self referential
bubble that validates certain choices
the bubble that expands once you leave
campus the pressure and anxiousness as
well take a certain job live in a
certain place hang out hang out with the
same kind of people and for God's sake
don't take a real risk that could impact
on your career all the time are getting
paid for the false sense of
you have the intellectual horsepower to
make things better in the world around
you as I said you are the most tolerant
generation in American history but
intellectual horsepower and tolerance
alone do not make a generation great
unless you can break out of that bubble
of your own making
technologically geographically racially
Scioscia economically truly connect with
the world around you
some of you rationalize you don't need
to be engaged but you can coordinate
self off from the effects of climate
change when your brother is not allowed
to marry the man he loves you are
diminished
you know I think and I'm not just saying
this I think my son Beau said it best
when he was the commencement speaker
here as Attorney General
in 2011 he said and I quote be the
guardians of a more complicated truth
that means are as important and
sometimes even more important than the
ends he went on to say you will be
lawyers in your profession but now
knowing what you know you'll also be
leaders in your communities and among
your friends and families and those more
private yet equally challenging
courtrooms
you will face a similar cycle of testing
and retesting you're on to say and you
will find peace when there are certain
rules that you can clewd are not
valuable your conscience for one your
conscience should not be malleable your
values for another they are your means
and along with learning you now possess
these and other things that will guide
you and of quote he believed as I do
that you can find balance between
ambitions and what's really important
you can do both you can absolutely
succeed in life without ever sacrificing
your ideals or your commitments to
others and family heed the words of
Justice Brandeis who wrote we are not
won by arguments that we can analyze but
by tone and temper by manner which is
man himself I've had over a thousand
young lawyers work for me
at one point it had 57 lawyers working
for me 21 of whom graduated one or two
in their class from the best law schools
in America but there was a difference it
was a difference they were all ambitious
but some rationalized a lot for if you
work in the service of what matters to
you as bo said if your guardians of the
more complicated truth not only society
but you will be better off for it not
asking for any great sacrifice I'm not
asking for sack cloth ashes not making
money you can do both and we'll all be
better off my wish for you the
graduating class of 2016 is that you're
both so successful but even more
importantly that you're happy the
pursuit of your ambition congratulations
class of 2016 I'm proud of you I'm proud
to stand among you as fellow alums may
God bless you and may God protect our
troops
thank you
you
